.. _1.4.0:

==================================
Cyclus 1.4.0 Release
==================================
:Author: Cyclus Developers
:Website: http://fuelcycle.org/
:Contact: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/cyclus-dev

The Cyclus core team is excited to announce the latest stable version of the
cyclus ecosystem!

Major features
==============

Compatibility:

* C++ 11 support is now required to compile Cyclus and Cycamore.

* Resource exchange preferences now default to 1.0 instead of zero.


`Cyclus <https://github.com/cyclus/cyclus>`_
---------------------------------------------

Features:

* Resource exchange now supports COIN linear and mixed integer linear solvers.
  This can be specified in the input file.

* Added new optional :ref:`ExplicitInventory <explicit-inv-table>`  and
  :ref:`ExplicitInventoryCompact <explicit-inv-compact-table>` tables to the
  database that can be enabled via input file.

* Implemented custom time step duration that can be set in the input
  file (i.e. CEP 23).  

* Agents/archetypes now can provide their own versions that are recorded in
  the :ref:`AgentVersion <agent-version-table>` table in the database for
  provenance/reproducibility.

* Support for new datatypes added to the sqlite backend:

  - ``std::list<std::pair<int, int> >``
  - ``std::map<std::string, std::pair<std::string, std::vector<double> > >``

* ``cycpp`` now supports the ``internal`` annotation for state variables
  allowing them to be persisted in the database, but not visible in the input
  file or GUI.

* Adding 2 new variables allowing to adjust the caculation tolerance:
  ``tolerance_generic`` and ``tolerance_generivc``.

Bug fixes:

* Fixed floating-point comparison bugs in DRE causing incorrectly failed
  resource trades.

* Determinism/reproducibility improved by calling agents' resource exchange
  related functions in consistent order.

* Fixed invalid memory access bugs affecting newer and mac compilers.

* xinclude substitutions in input files are now procesed for the input file
  stored in output databases - rather than storing the incomplete, partial
  input file.

* Archetype compilation now correctly fails early if the ``cycpp``
  preprocessor fails.

* Fix late silent failures on <= 0.0 quantity bids to early loud failures.

* ``cyclus::toolkit::ResBuf`` is no longer experimental.


`Cycamore <https://github.com/cyclus/cycamore>`_
--------------------------------------------------

* Added Storage archetype. This Facility is intended to hold materials for a
  user specified amount of time in order to model a storage facility with a
  certain residence time or holdup time.

* Added Mixer archetype.  This facility Mixer mixes N streams with fixed,
  static, user-specified ratios into a single output stream. The Mixer has N
  input inventories: one for each streams to be mixed, and one output stream.
  The supplying of mixed material is constrained by available inventory of mixed
  material quantities.

* All Cycamore archetypes now uses the ``tolerance_resource`` for all the buffer
  ``Pop``.


`Cymetric <https://github.com/cyclus/cymetric>`_
--------------------------------------------------

* Added new metrics: full list `here <http://fuelcycle.org/user/cymetric/api/metrics.html>`_
* Added a new directory with cymetric usage examples
* Separated out all archetype-specific metrics from the main metrics

Summary
=======

Since v1.3.0,

* Cyclus: 265 commits resulting in  155 files changed, 15488 insertions(+), 5738 deletions(-)

* Cycamore: 131 commits resulting in  61 files changed, 3185 insertions(+), 1530 deletions(-)

* Cymetric: 35 commits resulting in  38 files changed, 1357 insertions(+), 1398 deletions(-)

Contributors
============
The following people contributed to this release of Cyclus.  A "*" by their
name indicates a first time contributor.  Names follow alphabetically, 

* Anthony Scopatz
* Arrielle Opotowsky
* Baptiste Mouginot*
* Jenny Littell*
* Katy Huff
* Matthew Gidden
* Meghan McGarry
* Paul Wilson
* Robert Carlsen
* Robert Flanagan
* Ryan Hodge*
* Steve Skutnik*

