.. _1.5.0:

==================================
Cyclus 1.5.0 Release
==================================
:Author: Cyclus Developers
:Website: http://fuelcycle.org/
:Contact: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/cyclus-dev

The Cyclus core team is excited to announce the latest stable version of the
Cyclus ecosystem!

Major Features
==============

Compatibility:

* C++ 11 support is now required to compile Cyclus and Cycamore.

* Resource exchange preferences now default to 1.0 instead of zero.


`Cyclus <https://github.com/cyclus/cyclus>`_
---------------------------------------------

Features:

* Resource exchange now supports COIN linear and mixed integer linear solvers.
  This can be specified in the input file.

* Added new optional :ref:`ExplicitInventory <explicit-inv-table>`  and
  :ref:`ExplicitInventoryCompact <explicit-inv-compact-table>` tables to the
  database that can be enabled via input file.

* Implemented custom time step duration that can be set in the input
  file (i.e. CEP 23).

* Agents/archetypes now can provide their own versions that are recorded in
  the :ref:`AgentVersion <agent-version-table>` table in the database for
  provenance/reproducibility.

* Support for new datatypes added to the sqlite backend:

  - ``std::list<std::pair<int, int> >``
  - ``std::map<std::string, std::pair<std::string, std::vector<double> > >``
  - ``std::vector<std::pair<std::pair<double, double>, std:map<std::string, double > > > >``


* ``cycpp`` now supports the ``internal`` annotation for state variables
  allowing them to be persisted in the database, but not visible in the input
  file or GUI.

* Adding 2 new variables to allow adjustments to the caculation tolerance:
  ``tolerance`` and ``tolerance_generic``.

* Building stubs archetypes now requires C++11.

* More effective hdf5 backend generation by using an AST setup with various
  nodes and blocks of nodes

* Generate lastest version in dbtypes.json upon install

* Now generate a Python library allowing Cymetric to be full Python 

Bug fixes:

* Fixed floating-point comparison bugs in DRE causing incorrectly failed
  resource trades.

* Determinism/reproducibility improved by calling agents' resource exchange
  related functions in consistent order.

* Fixed invalid memory access bugs affecting newer and mac compilers.

* xinclude substitutions in input files are now processed for the input file
  stored in output databases - rather than storing the incomplete, partial
  input file.

* Archetype compilation now correctly fails early if the ``cycpp``
  preprocessor fails.

* Fix late silent failures on <= 0.0 quantity bids to early loud failures.

* ``cyclus::toolkit::ResBuf`` is no longer experimental.

* Fix bad types in ``dbtypes.json``


`Cycamore <https://github.com/cyclus/cycamore>`_
--------------------------------------------------

* Added Storage archetype. This Facility is intended to hold materials for a
  user specified amount of time in order to model a storage facility with a
  certain residence time or holdup time.

* Added Mixer archetype.  This facility Mixer mixes N streams with fixed,
  static, user-specified ratios into a single output stream. The Mixer has N
  input inventories: one for each streams to be mixed, and one output stream.
  The supplying of mixed material is constrained by available inventory of mixed
  material quantities.

* All Cycamore archetypes now uses the ``tolerance_resource`` for all the buffer ``Pop``.


`Cymetric <https://github.com/cyclus/cymetric>`_
--------------------------------------------------

* Added new metrics: full list `here <http://fuelcycle.org/user/cymetric/api/metrics.html>`_
* Added a new directory with cymetric usage examples
* Separated out all archetype-specific metrics from the main metrics
* Is now full Python


Summary
=======

Since v1.3.0,

* Cyclus: 865 commits resulting in  213 files changed, 23823 insertions(+), 6436 deletions(-)

* Cycamore: 177 commits resulting in  71 files changed, 4389 insertions(+), 2077 deletions(-)

* Cymetric: 65 commits resulting in  58 files changed, 1490 insertions(+), 4220 deletions(-)


Contributors
============
The following people contributed to this release of Cyclus.  A "*" by their
name indicates a first time contributor.  Names follow alphabetically, 

* Robert Carlsen
* Robert Flanagan
* Matthew Gidden
* Ryan Hodge*
* Katy Huff
* Jenny Littell*
* Meghan McGarry
* Baptiste Mouginot*
* Arrielle Opotowsky
* Anthony Scopatz
* Steve Skutnik*
* Paul Wilson

